---
created: 2023-03-14T19:51:58+00:00
modified: 2023-03-20T21:20:26+00:00
---

# Custom Request DSLs with Http4s

Recently I've been playing around with Http4s' DSL it provides to define our service's endpoints. The technique Http4s uses is a powerful set of combined pattern matchers that allows us to layer endpoint information into Scala's pattern match mechanic. (The cost of this unfortunately is a loss of inspectability in our endpoint definitions.)

// Using Auth routes as an example?

In some use-cases we might want to capture some information from the request as part of our endpoint definition beyond the common components. For the sake of example let's say we want to change endpoint behaviour based on the `User-Agent` header.

How might that look? Let's sketch out our desired DSL.

```scala
HttpRoutes.of[IO] {
  case User(Bob) ~ Get / "resource" / IntVar() =>
}
```

To understand how we might add this we need to explore how Http4s cleverly uses Scala's pattern match system. When we pattern match on a case class the Scala method is actually invoking a method called `unapply` to decide if the given value "matches". Typically that method might look something like this.

```
object Foo {
  def unapply(foo: Foo): Option[Int]
}
```

In this case the implementation knows how to decompose a Foo into an Int, by using the class' field. In some cases we might not be able to access a field like that (for example, an ADT) and so the optional return type allows us to indicate the match failed. This method doesn't have to be synthetic and we are allowed to define our own custom unapply matchers unrelated to the type they are matching on.

Http4s has some great examples of when we might want to use extractors. The status matcher `Succesful` matches response statuses within the 2xx range, with similar matchers for 4xx and 5xx too. This showcases the first type of matcher - a way of grouping similar terms in a match.

The other useful property of Scala's matchers is that they can be nested the same way that our data can be nested. For example `case Right(Some(3)) => ` first applies the `Either` matcher before applying the `Option` matcher to the result. Surprisingly this same nesting is how another familiar pattern match is achieved; the list matcher: `case 1 :: 2 :: 3 :: Nil => ` is actually a `::` matcher unpacking the elements of the list one by one. This special syntax eliminates the bracket syntax we're used to seeing in favour of something more readable. Understanding this you might begin to see how the Http4s DSL takes shape.

Through a series of DSL objects made available via the DSL trait we can string a series of matchers along to define our expected request structure. Jumping to implementation (or checking the source code) gives us an idea on how to structure our own custom matcher. Types left out for brevity.

```
def unapply(in: Request): Option[(Out, Final)]
```

The in represents the left-hand parameter in our match. The out is a custom field that we can include in our match. The second part, final, is the value our matcher will pass onto the rest of the matcher. Needs checking??
